---
title: "Data Definitions"
date: 2020-09-22T22:45:12+08:00
slug: "data-types"
description: "Introduction to Date Definitions and templates"
keywords: ["CS135", "Waterloo", "Data Definitions","Data Templates", "DrRacket"]
draft: false
tags: ["CS135", "Waterloo"]
math: true
toc: true
---

## Data Definitions

Recursive data definition: a definition that refers to itself.

Recursive data definition have two parts, a base case that does not refer to itself, and the recursion.

```racket
A (listof X) is one of:
* empty
* (cons X (listof X))
```

Notice the use of `(listof X)` in defining the data definition.

Other types of data definition can include numbers:

```racket
;; A Nat is one of:
;; * 0
;; * (add1 Nat)
```

## Templates

A template is a general framework that we develop in order to deal with certain kinds of data definitions.

Of course this means that templates are built on top of data definitions.

We use `...` to represent parts of the template that are to be filled in by the specific problem.

```racket
;; (listof-X-template lox) PURPOSE
;; Examples:
(check-expect (listof-X-template empty) ANSWER)
(check-expect (listof-X-template (cons X empty)) ANSWER)

;; listof-X-template: (listof X) -> Any
(define (listof-X-template lox)
    (cond
        [(empty? lox) ...]
        [(cons? lox) (... (first lox)
                            (listof-X-template (rest lox)))]))

;; Tests
```

Natural Number template

```racket
;; (nat-template n): PURPOSE
;; Examples:
(check-expect (nat-template 0) ANSWER)
(check-expect (nat-template 1) ANSWER)

;; nat-template: Num -> Any
(define (nat-template n)
  (cond
    [(zero? n) ...]
    [else (... n ...
          ... (nat-template (sub1 n)) ...)])) ; Notice how we did sub1 instead of add1
```

The key to breaking down the complex case is to think how you will solve the case just one size bigger.

Another thing to note is to consider how to process each case. For example, `empty` cannot be processed further and hence we left `...` in `(empty? lox) ...`. On the other hand, we could process the first element of the non-empty list to combine it with the rest of the list. Hence, we see `(... (first lox) (listof-X-template (rest lox)))`.

The template matching the recursive data definition so easily is not a coincidence.

In particular, the template and data definition are part of a group of recursion known as simple recursion.

## Simple Recursion

A function is considered to employ simple recursion if the arguments in the recursive function call satisfy either of the criterion:

1. The arguments are unchanged.
2. The arguments are one step closer to the base case. (Hence `sub1` for `nat-template`)

Sometimes, in order to best utilize recursive functions, we need data in form that is not convenient for the user to provide.

For that we use wrapper functions.

## Wrapper Functions

Consider counting the number of characters in a string. You would expect `(count-char #\e "Hello")`.

In reality, your function might have a contract that specifies `count-char: Char (listof Str) -> Int`.

To bridge the divides in reality, we can have a wrapper function that takes `Char Str`, and converts it into `Char (listof Str)` for the recursive function.

In particular, wrapper functions should be:

* Short and simple
* Calling the main function which does much more
* Sets up the appropriate condition for calling the other functions.
  * Often done by converting between data types
