---
title: "Patterns of Recursion"
date: 2020-10-3T22:06:12+08:00
slug: "patterns-of-recursion"
description: "Understanding the different patterns of recursion"
keywords: ["CS135", "Waterloo", "recursion","patterns of recursion", "DrRacket"]
draft: false
tags: ["CS135", "Waterloo"]
math: true
toc: true
---

We have defined [simple recursion](../CS135/4.data_definitions_templates.md/#simple-recursion) before.

Aside from needing a base case, simple recursion has two requirements:

1. Arguments are passed into the function unchanged
2. Arguments are one step closer to the base case

Aside from that, there are two other kinds of recursion, accumulative and generative.

## Accumulative Recursion

Accumulative recursion keeps track of a value that stores the information that encompasses everything that the function has seen thus far.

THe accumulated value is then returned when the recursive function reaches a base case.

This accumulated value is known as an accumulator.

Wrappers are often used around accumulated recursion due to the extra parameters that needs to be passed into the function.

Indicators of a accumulative recursion pattern:

* The value(s) in the accumulator function is used in one or more base case.
* There is a wrapper function that sets the initial value of the accumulator.
* All arguments to the recursive function is either:
  * Unchanged
  * One step closer to the base case
  * A partial answer for the evaluated cases thus far.

Often, accumulative recursion can be used to substitute a simple recursion to remove a particular function call in order to speed it up.

Of course, do not pre-maturely optimize!

## Generative Recursion

In generative recursion, the parameters for the recursion function is freely calculated at each step.

Another term for this kind of recursion is divide and conquer.

There are no constraints about what can and cannot be passed as an argument, unlike simple and accumulative recursion.

Euclid's greatest common divisor is an example of a simple generative recursion algorithm.

We normally test the base cases and some recursive case.

## Forms of Recursion

So a recursion can either be simple, generative, or accumulative.

Depending on the circumstances, the following are possible forms of recursion.

These forms apply to all three kinds of recursion.

## Tail Recursion

Tail recursion refers to recursion in which the recursive call is the last step being executed.

That is, the base case is the last thing to be run.

Here's an example of summing a list written in a tail recursion fashion

```python
def mySum(li: List[int], total: int):
  if len(list) == 0:
    return total
  else:
    return mySum(li[1:], total + li[0])
```

Contrastingly, we can write it in a non tail recursive way:

```python
def mySum(li: List[int]):
  if len(list) == 0:
    return 0
  else:
    return li[0] + mySum(li[1:])
```

In general, accumulative recursion tends to utilize tail recursion while simple recursion does not.

## Mutual Recursion

Mutual recursion happens when a pair of functions calls on each other.

It would look something like this:

```python
def cool(toys):
  # do something
  if toys:
    return
  return uncool()

def uncool():
  #do something else:
  toys = some_other_function()
  cool(toys)
```

It is important that even in the case of mutual recursion, there is a base case!

Mutual recursion often arise due to complicated relationships between data. Trust the data definitions and templates define.

The worst thing to do is to shy away from mutual recursion for fear it becomes too complicated.

## Termination

The base case bounds the depth of recursion. Thus as long as some arguments get closer to base case, evaluation cannot go on forever.
