---
title: "Structures"
date: 2020-10-18T10:16:12+08:00
slug: "structures-in-racket"
description: "Building complicated data types"
keywords: ["CS135", "Waterloo", "structures", "DrRacket"]
draft: false
tags: ["CS135", "Waterloo"]
math: true
toc: true
---

Structures are compound data. Compound data are data that always occur together.

For example, this could be a employee's name with their occupation and job description.

To create such a data type, we can define a constructor, a predicate, along with getters to access data within our compound data.

In racket, defining a structure will look something like:

```racket
(define-struct Employee (name occupation desc))
;; A <type-name> (<English-name>) is a (make-<sname> <type> ...)
```

Using the `define-struct` function gives us back the total number of parameters + 2 functions.

One function for retrieving each parameter, one constructor, and one predicate.

Once defined, we can create our structure with `(make-employee "NAME" "JOB" "DESC")`.

`(make-employee "NAME" "JOB" "DESC")` also becomes a value and will not be simplified into a list or any core data type that seems appropriate.

## Modifying Structures value

Because racket is a functional programming language, it does not allow us to modify values directly.

Instead, we create a new structure with changing the data where we want too before initialization.

## Structure templates

For functions taking a particular structure, we simply have all the accessor present.

```racket
(define (emplooyee-template e)
    (... (employee-name e)
    ... (employee-job e)
    ... (emplooyee-desc e) ... ))
```

## Mixed Data

With structures defined, we can combine multiple structures into one cohesive application

For example, there are the structures `desktops` and `laptops`.

We can then have a mixed data `computers` that is either one of `desktops` and `laptops`.

The template for `computers` will then check for either of the types and include their templates.

```racket
;; computers-template: Computers -> Any
(define (computers-template computer)
    (cond
        [(desktops? computer) (... (desktop-template computer))]
        [(laptops? computer) (... (laptop-template computer))]))
```

Interesting to note is that `define-struct` does not actually care about the type of parameters being fed in.

Therefore, we might want to create type safe constructors just to be doubly sure.

## Structure versus List

A `define-struct` seems to be very similar to a plain old `list`, and that is kind of right.

Other than the fact that we have fancy accessor instead of `first, second` etc, and a predicate, we do not get much more.

Here's some of the advantages of Structures:

- Cleaner code due to cleaner and more specific names
- Lots of automatically generated code to access and check for type
- Prevent accession error with the generated code that allows to retrieve specific fields

advantages of `list`:

- More compact. No need to define all the extra definitions
- Functions are more general. `first item` will work on all list, not just a specific one.
  - Comparatively, we have to make check for the structure type first before using the appropriate accessors.
