---
title: "The Greatest Common Divisor"
date: 2020-10-20T23:30:19+08:00
slug: "math-sets"
description: "An introduction to the Greatest Common Divisor"
keywords: ["MATH135", "Waterloo", "Greatest Common Divisor","GCD", "Proofs"]
draft: false
tags: ["MATH135", "Waterloo"]
math: true
toc: true
---

To start, let us consider absolute numbers:

$$\forall x \in \mathbb{R}, x = |x| \lor x < |x| \equiv x \leq |x|$$

## Bounds By Divisibility (BBD)

Bounds By Divisibility states that if $a \mid b$, and $b\neq 0$, then $a \leq |b|$.

Proof:

Let $a, b \in \mathbb{Z}$ be given. Let us assume that $a \mid b$, and $b\neq 0$

By the definition of divisibility this means that $b = ra$ for some $r \in \mathbb{Z}$.

Since $b\neq 0$, we know that $r\ne1 0$. Therefore, $|r| \geq 1$.

$|b| = |ra| \geq 1\cdot |a|$. Therefore $|a| \leq |b|$. Applying the notion that $a\leq |a|$, we get $a\leq |a|\leq|b|$.

## Division Algorithm (DA)

The division algorithm states that:

$$\forall a \in \mathbb{Z}, \forall b \in \mathbb{Z^+}, \exists q, r \in \mathbb{Z}, q\neq r, a = qb + r, 0 < r < b$$

To proof, assume that there exists $q_1$ and $r_1$, such that $a = q_1 b + r_1$. Assume also that there exist $q_2$ and $r_2$, such that $a = q_2 b + r_2$.

If that is the case, then we note that $0 < r_1 < b$, and that $0 < r_2 < b \implies -b < r_2 < 0$.

Adding the two inequality, we get $-b < r_1 - r_2 < b$.

Note that $0 = a - a = q_1b + r_1 - (q_2 b + r_2) = (q_1 - q_2)b + (r_2 - r_2)$

Since $q_1, q_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$, using known laws about product and sum of integers, $q_1 - q_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$.

Therefore, it implies that $b\mid r_1 - r_2$. Hence we can write $kb = r_1 - r_2$ where $k \in \mathbb{Z}$.

Substituting into $-b < r_1 - r_2 < b$, we get $-b < kb < b \equiv -1 < k < 1$. Since $k \in \mathbb{Z} \implies k =0$.

If $k = 0, kb = 0, \implies r_1 - r_2 = 0$. Therefore, $r_1 = r_2$.

Substituting this back into $(q_1 - q_2)b + (r_2 - r_2) = 0$, we get $(q_1 - q_2)b =0$. Since $b > 0, b \neq 0 \implies q_1 - q_2 = 0 \implies q_1 = q_2$.

Therefore, both $q$ and $r$ are unique.

## Common Divisor and Greatest Common Divisor (GCD)

A divisor is said to be common between any set of integers (consider 2) iff $a \mid b \land a \mid c$.

A divisor is said to be the greatest common divisor, written $d = \gcd(a, b)$, if and only if, for all other divisor $c$, $c \leq d$. (similar to $lub$ and $glb$.)

If both $a$ and $b$ are $0$, then $\gcd(0,0) = 0$.

Some properties of $\gcd$:

* $\gcd(a, a) = \gcd(a, -a) = |a|$
* $\gcd(a, 0) = |a|$
* $\gcd (a, 1) = \gcd (a, -1) = 1$

## Greatest Common Divisor with Remainder

The greatest common divisor with remainder states that:

$$\forall a, b, q, r \in \mathbb{Z}, a = qb + r \implies \gcd(a, b) = \gcd(b, r)$$

Note that this does not have the condition that $0 < r < b$.

Proof:

let $a, b, q, r$ be integers. Note that either $a$ and $b$ are both zero or they are not both zero.

Consider $a$ and $b$ not both zero:

Let us assume that $a = qb +r$. Let $d = \gcd(a,b)$. This implies that $d \mid a \land d \mid b$.

By Divisibility combination of Integers (DIC), $d \mid (a - qb)$.

Since $a= qb + r, a - qb = r$. Therefore, $d \mid r$.

Now let $c$ be a divisor of $b$ and $r$. By DIC, $c \mid qb + r \implies c \mid a$.

Since for any $c \mid r, c\mid b \implies c \mid a$, and $d = \gcd(a, b)$, by definition, $c \leq d$.

Hence $d = \gcd(a, b) = \gcd(b, r)$.

Consider $a$ and $b$ both zero:

In which case, $r = a - qb = 0 - q0 = 0$. Therefore, we get $\gcd(a, b) = \gcd(0,0) = \gcd(b,r)$.

Hence $\gcd(a, b) = \gcd(b,r)$ when both $a$ and $b$ are $0$.

### Applications of GCD WR

GCD WR can be applied to find the greatest common divisor of 2 function.

* $\gcd(8n + 3, 5n -2)$

## Euclidean Algorithm

The Euclidean algorithm states that the $\gcd$ for any two integers can be found by recursively applying two propositions from above:

* Divisibility Algorithm
* Greatest Common Divisor with Reminder

At every stage, for $\gcd(a, b)$, we can write $a = qb + r$ using the division algorithm.

We then note through GDC WR that $\gcd(a,b) = \gcd(b, r)$. Since $0 < r < b$, we now have $\gcd(b, r)$ of a smaller pair.

We keep applying the propositions until we get $\gcd(x, 0)$. $x$ is then the greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$.

## Greatest Common Divisor Characterization Theorem - Certificate of Correctness

The greatest common divisor characterization theorem states that for all integers $a$, $b$, and a **non-negative** integer $d$, if:

* $d$ is a common divisor of $a$ and $b$
* There exist some $s$ and $t$ such that $as + bt = d$

Then $d = \gcd(a,b)$.

$s$ and $t$ are said to be providing the certificate of correctness for $d$.

Proof:

Consider the case where $a$ and $b$ are both zero and when $a$ and $b$ are not both zero.

When $a$ and $b$ are not both zero:

Since $d\mid a$ and $d\mid b$, $d \neq0$ so $d$ is positive.

TODO

### Application of GCD CT

Used to proof that a particular integer $d$ is $\gcd$ for a given set of integers.

### Finding $s$ and $t$

To find the certificate of correctness for the $\gcd$ of a pair of integers, simply apply the Euclidean algorithm.

Then starting from the result, substitute the expanded version of the remainder from the earlier step until we reach the original two integers.

## Bezout's Lemma

Bezout's Lemma states that the converse of the greatest common divisor characterization theorem is also true.

That is, $\forall a, b \in \mathbb{Z}, \exists s, t \in \mathbb{Z}, s.t. as + bt = d$, where $d = \gcd(a,b)$.

### Application of Bezout's Lemma

Used to show that there exists $s$ and $t$ such that $as + bt = \gcd(a, b)$.

* For all integers $k,m,n$ with $k \geq 0, \gcd (km,kn) = k \cdot \gcd(m,n)$
  * Apply GCD CT first then Bezout's Lemma to finish the proof.
