---
title: "Unsupervised Learning"
date: 2020-06-28
slug: "unsupervised-learning"
description: "Diving into unsupervised learning with k-means clustering"
keywords: ["cs221", "AI", "Artificial Intelligence", "Stanford", "Machine Learning", "unsupervised learning", "k means clustering", "ML"]
draft: false
tags: ["AI", "cs221"]
math: true
toc: true
---

So far, we've only covered supervised learning. Data points occurs in pairs, $(x, y)$, an input and its corresponding output label

Labelled data however, is very expensive to obtain. Often, someone has to manually label these data.

Unlabelled data on the other hand, is much cheaper. A goal then is harness the unlabelled data to help make better predictions.

The goal of unsupervised learning then is to automatically discover the rich latent structure that data often has.

## Types of unsupervised learning

We have two main categories

- Clustering
- Dimensionality reduction

This article will focus on clustering exclusively.

## Clustering

In clustering, our input $D_{train} = \{x_1, \cdots, x_n\}$ is to be converted to $[z_1, \cdots, z_n], z_i \in \{1,\cdots, K\}$, where $z_i$ is the cluster associate with point $i$.

### K-means Clustering

K-means is a particular method for performing clustering which is based on associating each cluster with a centroid $\mu_k \text{for } k = 1 \cdots K$

The goal is to assign each point to a cluster and to place the centroid for that cluster so that ech point $\phi(x_i)$ is closest to centroid $\large \mu_{z_i}$

To clarify some of the terminology:

- Centroid: $\mu_k, k = 1 \cdots K, \mu_k \in \real^d$
- Clusters: $1 \cdots K$
- Point: $\phi(x_i)$
- Cluster label for point $i$: $z_i, z_i \in \{1, \cdots K\}$

As usual, we have an objective function that we are optimizing for.

It can be written as such:

$$ Loss_{\text{kmeans}}(z, \mu) = \large \sum_{i = 1}^{n}\|\phi(x_i) - \mu_{z_i}\|^2$$

How then, do we optimize our function?

Gradient descent cannot be used here because the value we are taking minimum with respects to a discrete value - cluster.

Dynamic programming cannot be used either because of there is a lack of overlapping sub-problems - distance of points from cluster's centroid are independent.

The solution then, is to alternate between assigning points to centroids, and centroid to points.

Algorithm for k-means:

$$
\text{Randomly initialise the point for the centroids}
$$
$$
\begin{aligned}&\text{for } t = 1 \cdots T: \\\\& \space \space \space \space \text{for each point } \phi(x_i):\\\\& \space \space \space \space \space \space \space \space \text{assign it to the closest centroid}: \\\\& \space \space \space \space \space \space \space \space z_i \leftarrow \min_{k = 1\cdots K} \|\phi(x_i) - \mu_{k}\|^2\\\\& \space \space \space \space \text{for each cluster } k = 1 \cdots K:\\\\& \space \space \space \space \space \space \space \space \text{set } u_k \text{ to be the average of points in cluster }k: \\\\& \space \space \space \space \space \space \space \space \mu_k \leftarrow \frac{1}{|i:z_i = k|} \sum_{i: z_i = k} \phi(x_i)\end{aligned}
$$

### Problems with K-means clustering: Mitigated with repeated runs and k-means ++

K-means is guaranteed to converge to a local minimum, but it is not guaranteed to find the global minimum.

To solve that, we can simply run K-means several times from multiple random centroid, $\mu$, initializations.

We will then choose the solution with the lowest lost.

Another solution is to apply K-means++. K-means++ is a heuristic which initializes centroids on training points so that they tend to be distant from one another.

### Extending K-means clustering

Sometime, the examples are not completely unlabelled.

In those cases, we can apply constraints to our k-means algorithm to ensure that points meant to be grouped together are, and those that are not, do not get grouped together.

This results in COP K-means (constrained k-means)

The pseudo-code is as follows:

```python
def copKMeans(points):
    # initialize µ1 · · · µk to be randomly selected pairs
    for each point i:
        assign i to closest cluster µj such that violateConstraints(i,µj,S) = False
        if no cluster is found, fail and exit

    for each cluster µj:
        update its center as the average of all the points in the cluster.

    repeat the assign i and cluster average steps until convergence

    return µ1 · · · µk

def violateConstraints(point,cluster,setOfMustHave):
    for each pair of points (point, j) in setOfMustHave
        if j not in cluster:
            return True # constraint violated
    return False # constraint not violated
```

## Conclusion

Unsupervised learning wraps up the tour of reflex models.

The main goal is not about the specific loss functions, or linear predictors.

Instead, the goal is to think in terms of the `model`, `learn`, and `inference` paradigm.

The first is `modelling`. There's two parts to that.

Firstly, [Feature extraction][feature]. Domain knowledge is applied to induce certain [hypothesis class][feature].

Secondly, a predictor is chosen. Either linear predictors or neural networks are employed here.

Loss functions then ties `modelling` to `learning`. While optimization is important, they can only happen when we come up with the right model choice.

Learning can only work when there’s a common core that cuts past all the idiosyncrasies of the examples. This is exactly what features are meant to capture.

Broadly speaking, machine learning is about learning predictors from some input to some output.

[feature]: ../features-in-machine-learning
