---
title: "Mathematical Sets"
date: 2020-10-20T23:30:19+08:00
slug: "math-sets"
description: "An introduction to Mathematical Sets"
keywords: ["MATH135", "Waterloo", "Mathematical sets","sets", "Proofs"]
draft: false
tags: ["MATH135", "Waterloo"]
math: true
toc: true
---

Sets are often the bedrock when it comes to specifying the domain of any quantified statement.

Some terminology as we dive further in:

* Empty set - can either be denoted as $\{\}$ or $\emptyset$.
  * Note  that $\{\emptyset\}$ is not an empty set. It is a set containing an empty set!
* Cardinality - $|S|$ Refers to the number of items within a set. $\emptyset = 0$

## Set Builder Notation

While sets can be listed explicitly, often the sets being dealt with are too big.

In cases like those, we use set builder notations.

Two things are needed:

1. Universe of discourse, $\mathcal{U}$, contains all the objects that we might be interest in
2. Open sentence, $P(x)$, to specify if a particular $x$ is in our set or not.

With these two ingredients we have the first type of set builder notation:

$$\{x \in \mathcal{U}: P(x)\}$$

The above notation describes a set containing all the object in $\mathcal{U}$ where $P(x)$ is true.

Sometimes, the $:$ is replaced with $\mid$. Others, the $\in \mathcal{U}$ is omitted.

## Second type of set builder notation

The next kind of set builder notation swaps out the open sentence for a function.

$$\{f(x) : x \in \mathcal{U}\}$$

Here, we are specifying a set in the form of $f(x)$ such that $x$ is in $\mathcal{U}$

## Set Builder Notation with Open sentence and function

The last kind of set builder notation combines the open sentence with a function.

$$\{f(x): P(x), x\in \mathcal{U}\}$$
$$\{f(x): x\in \mathcal{U}, P(x)\}$$

This describes a set in the form of $f(x)$ such that $P(x)$ is true and $x$ in $\mathcal{U}$.

## Pointers on Set Builder Notation

In all three kinds of set builder notation, there is a left and right hand side.

The left hand side indicates typical element in the set.

The right hand side specifies the condition that has to be true for the element to be in the set.

If "extra" copies of a particular value is created, it is ignored (like sets in computer science).

In other words, each item in a set is unique.

## Set Operations

There are four main kinds of set Operations

### Union

$$S \cup T = \{x: x \in S \lor x \in T\}$$

### Intersection

$$S \cap T = \{x: x\in S \land x \in T\}$$

### Difference

$$S - T = \{x: x \in S \land x \notin T\}$$

### Complement

Complement of $S$ is represented as $\bar{S}$.

$$\{x: x \notin S\}$$

With reference to the universe of discourse, the complement can be written as $\bar{S} = \mathcal{U} - S$.

Or in terms of set builder notation $\{x \in \mathcal{U}: x \notin S\}$

## Disjoint sets

When the intersection of two sets is an empty set, we say that they are disjoint, $S \cap T = \emptyset$.

Note that any set intersecting an empty set is also disjoint. $S \cap \emptyset = \emptyset$.

The intersection of a set and its complement is also disjoint. $S \cap \bar{S} = \emptyset$.

## Subsets

$S$ is a subset of $T$ when every set in $S$ is also in $T$. $S \subseteq T$

$S$ is a proper subset of $T$ when every element of $S$ is in $T$ and there exists objects in $T$ not in $S$. $S \subsetneq T$

When a set is not a subset, we write $S \not\subseteq T$.

### Properties of Subsets

* An empty set $\emptyset$ is a subset of every other set.
* A finite set of $n$ elements has $2^n$ subsets
  * Proof by Mathematical Induction. (Rough outline)
    * For the inductive conclusion, we split subsets into one with $k + 1$ and ones without $k + 1$
    * Every set in without $k + 1$ will become a set with $k+ 1$ by adding $k+ 1$
    * the same applies for the converse, therefore, the number of subset without $k + 1$ is equal to the number of subset with $k + 1$.
    * This is the same as twice the number of element with $k$ elements.

## Proving for Subsets

To prove that $S \subseteq T$, we prove the quantified statement $\forall x \in \mathcal{U}, x \in S \implies x \in T$.

When proving for $not\subset$ we simply find a counter example such that the implication for $\subseteq$ is false.

To prove that two sets are equal, it is equivalent to proving that $S = T$.

In quantified statement terms, $x \in \mathcal{U}, x \in S \iff x \in T$.
